---
title: Two-Party Buyer Protocol
---

<!--
    var Syndicate = require('../../src/main.js');
-->

# {{ page.title }}

This is an extended two-buyer book-purchase protocol, based
loosely on an example given in:

> K. Honda, N. Yoshida, and M. Carbone, “Multiparty asynchronous
> session types,” POPL 2008.

## The Scenario

A book-seller responds to requests for book prices when asked. A
pair of prospective buyers run through a shopping list. For each
book, the first buyer offers to split the cost of the book with
the second. If the second has enough money left, it accepts;
otherwise, it rejects the offer, and the first buyer tries a
different split. If the second buyer agrees to a split, it then
negotiates the purchase of the book with the book-seller.

## The Protocol

### Role: SELLER

When interest in `bookQuote($title, _)` appears, asserts
`bookQuote(title, Maybe Float)`, `false` meaning not available,
and otherwise an asking-price.

When interest in `order($title, $offer-price, _, _)` appears,
asserts `order(title, offer-price, false, false)` for "no sale",
otherwise `order(title, offer-price, PositiveInteger, String)`, an
accepted sale.

### Role: BUYER

Observes `bookQuote(title, $price)` to learn prices.

Observes `order(title, offer-price, $id, $delivery-date)` to make orders.

### Role: SPLIT-PROPOSER

Observes `splitProposal(title, asking-price, contribution,
$accepted)` to make a split-proposal and learn whether it was
accepted or not.

### Role: SPLIT-DISPOSER

When interest in `splitProposal($title, $asking-price,
$contribution, _)` appears, asserts `splitProposal(title,
askingPrice, contribution, true)` to indicate they are willing to
go through with the deal, in which case they then perform the role
of BUYER for title/asking-price, or asserts `splitProposal(title,
asking-price, contribution, false)` to indicate they are unwilling
to go through with the deal.

## The Code

### Type Declarations

First, we declare *assertion types* for our protocol.

    assertion type bookQuote(title, price);
    assertion type order(title, price, id, deliveryDate);

    assertion type splitProposal(title, price, contribution, accepted);

### Utilities

This routine is under consideration for possible addition to the
core library.

    function whileRelevantAssert(P) {
      react {
        assert P;
      } until {
        case retracted Syndicate.observe(P);
      }
    }

### Implementation: SELLER

    function seller() {
      actor {

We give our actor two state variables: a dictionary recording our
inventory of books (mapping title to price), and a counter
tracking the next order ID to be allocated.

We mark each property (entry) in the `books` table as a *field* so
that dependency-tracking on a per-book basis is enabled. As a result,
when a book is sold, any client still interested in its price will
learn that the book is no longer available.

We do not enable dependency-tracking for either the `books` table
itself or the `nextOrderId` field: nothing depends on tracking
changes in their values.

        this.books = {};
        field this.books["The Wind in the Willows"] = 3.95;
        field this.books["Catch 22"] = 2.22;
        field this.books["Candide"] = 34.95;
        this.nextOrderId = 10001483;

Looking up a price yields `false` if no such book is in our
inventory.

        this.priceOf = function (title) {
          return (title in this.books) && field this.books[title];
        };

The seller responds to interest in bookQuotes by asserting a
responsive record, if one exists.

        react {
          during Syndicate.observe(bookQuote($title, _)) {
            assert bookQuote(title, this.priceOf(title));
          }
        }

It also responds to order requests.

        react {
          on asserted
            Syndicate.observe(order($title, $offerPrice, _, _)) {

We cannot sell a book we do not have, and we will not sell for
less than our asking price.

            var askingPrice = this.priceOf(title);
            if ((askingPrice === false) || (offerPrice < askingPrice)) {
              whileRelevantAssert(
                order(title, offerPrice, false, false));
            } else {

But if we can sell it, we do so by allocating an order ID and
replying to the orderer.

              var orderId = this.nextOrderId++;
              delete field this.books[title];

              actor {
                whileRelevantAssert(
                  order(title, offerPrice, orderId, "March 9th"));
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }

### Implementation: SPLIT-PROPOSER and book-quote-requestor

    function buyerA() {
      actor {
        var self = this;

Our actor remembers which books remain on its shopping list, and
tries to buy them one at a time, sharing costs with `buyerB`.

        self.titles = ["Catch 22",
                       "Encyclopaedia Brittannica",
                       "Candide",
                       "The Wind in the Willows"];

JavaScript's callback-oriented blocking means that we express our
loop in almost a tail-recursive style, using helper functions
`buyBooks` and `trySplit`.

        buyBooks();

        function buyBooks() {
          if (self.titles.length === 0) {
            console.log("A has bought everything they wanted!");
            return;
          }

          var title = self.titles.shift();

First, retrieve a quote for the title, and analyze the result.

          react until {
            case asserted bookQuote(title, $price) {
              if (price === false) {
                console.log("A learns that "+title+" is out-of-stock.");
                buyBooks();
              } else {
                console.log("A learns that the price of "+title+
                            " is "+price);

Next, repeatedly make split offers to a SPLIT-DISPOSER until
either one is accepted, or the contribution from the
SPLIT-DISPOSER becomes pointlessly small. We start the process by
offering to split the price of the book evenly.

                trySplit(title, price, price / 2);
              }
            }
          }
        }

        function trySplit(title, price, contribution) {
          console.log("A makes an offer to split the price of "+title+
                      " contributing "+contribution);

If we are about to offer to split the price, but the other buyer
would contribute less than 10c, then it's not worth bothering; we
may as well buy it ourselves. Another version of the program could
perform the BUYER role here.

          if (contribution > (price - 0.10)) {
            console.log("A gives up on "+title+".");
            buyBooks();
          } else {

Make our proposal, and wait for a response.

            react until {
              case asserted
                splitProposal(title, price, contribution, true) {
                  console.log("A learns that the split-proposal for "+
                              title+" was accepted");
                  buyBooks();
                }

              case asserted
                splitProposal(title, price, contribution, false) {
                  console.log("A learns that the split-proposal for "+
                              title+" was rejected");
                  trySplit(title,
                           price,
                           contribution + ((price - contribution) / 2));
                }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }

### Implementation: SPLIT-DISPOSER and BUYER

    function buyerB() {
      actor {

This actor maintains a record of the amount of money it has left
to spend.

        this.funds = 5.00;

It spends its time waiting for a SPLIT-PROPOSER to offer a
`splitProposal`.

        react {
          on asserted
            Syndicate.observe(splitProposal($title,
                                            $price,
                                            $theirContribution,
                                            _))
          {
            var myContribution = price - theirContribution;
            console.log("B is being asked to contribute "+myContribution+
                        " toward "+title+" at price "+price);

We may not be able to afford contributing this much.

            if (myContribution > this.funds) {
              console.log("B hasn't enough funds ("+this.funds+
                          " remaining)");
              whileRelevantAssert(
                splitProposal(title, price, theirContribution, false));
            } else {

But if we *can* afford it, update our remaining funds and spawn a
small actor to handle the actual purchase now that we have agreed
on a split.

              var remainingFunds = this.funds - myContribution;
              console.log("B accepts the offer, leaving them with "+
                          remainingFunds+" remaining funds");
              this.funds = remainingFunds;

              actor {
                react {

While waiting for order confirmation, take the opportunity to
signal to our SPLIT-PROPOSER that we accepted their proposal.

                  assert splitProposal(title,
                                       price,
                                       theirContribution,
                                       true);

When order confirmation arrives, this purchase is completed.

                } until {
                  case asserted order(title, price, $id, $date) {
                    console.log("The order for "+title+" has id "+id+
                                ", and will be delivered on "+date);
                  }
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }

### Starting Configuration

    ground dataspace {
      seller();
      buyerA();
      buyerB();
    }

## A Sample Run

Run the program with `../../bin/syndicatec index.js | node` from a
checkout of the Syndicate repository.

    A learns that the price of Catch 22 is 2.22
    A makes an offer to split the price of Catch 22 contributing 1.11
    B is being asked to contribute 1.11 toward Catch 22 at price 2.22
    B accepts the offer, leaving them with 3.8899999999999997 remaining funds
    A learns that the split-proposal for Catch 22 was accepted
    A learns that Encyclopaedia Brittannica is out-of-stock.
    The order for Catch 22 has id 10001483, and will be delivered on March 9th
    A learns that the price of Candide is 34.95
    A makes an offer to split the price of Candide contributing 17.475
    B is being asked to contribute 17.475 toward Candide at price 34.95
    B hasn't enough funds (3.8899999999999997 remaining)
    A learns that the split-proposal for Candide was rejected
    A makes an offer to split the price of Candide contributing 26.212500000000002
    B is being asked to contribute 8.7375 toward Candide at price 34.95
    B hasn't enough funds (3.8899999999999997 remaining)
    A learns that the split-proposal for Candide was rejected
    A makes an offer to split the price of Candide contributing 30.581250000000004
    B is being asked to contribute 4.368749999999999 toward Candide at price 34.95
    B hasn't enough funds (3.8899999999999997 remaining)
    A learns that the split-proposal for Candide was rejected
    A makes an offer to split the price of Candide contributing 32.765625
    B is being asked to contribute 2.184375000000003 toward Candide at price 34.95
    B accepts the offer, leaving them with 1.7056249999999968 remaining funds
    A learns that the split-proposal for Candide was accepted
    A learns that the price of The Wind in the Willows is 3.95
    A makes an offer to split the price of The Wind in the Willows contributing 1.975
    The order for Candide has id 10001484, and will be delivered on March 9th
    B is being asked to contribute 1.975 toward The Wind in the Willows at price 3.95
    B hasn't enough funds (1.7056249999999968 remaining)
    A learns that the split-proposal for The Wind in the Willows was rejected
    A makes an offer to split the price of The Wind in the Willows contributing 2.9625000000000004
    B is being asked to contribute 0.9874999999999998 toward The Wind in the Willows at price 3.95
    B accepts the offer, leaving them with 0.718124999999997 remaining funds
    A learns that the split-proposal for The Wind in the Willows was accepted
    A has bought everything they wanted!
    The order for The Wind in the Willows has id 10001485, and will be delivered on March 9th
